---
layout: post
title: "I never cared about my profession"
permalink: /blog/:title
date: 2019-12-27 20:00:00 -0700
tags: [boring, development, history, quit, wisdom, community, involvement]
categories: [development]
---
## How it all started
Ever since I can remember I have always enjoyed tech. I was the one in the family that introduced a computer into the household, I was balling with the stacks I got from my first communion. I dont even know how I knew what a computer was back then, and why I needed one so badly. Most likely I saw it in an ad, or school, or someone elses house and got obsessed. I still remember my first PC, especially since it was extremely unique even for todays standards. It was a Sony Vaio pcv-90 desktop. That thing was a beast, Windows 95, a whole 166MHz Pentium CPU, and a whopping 16MB of RAM. It was out of this world with its custom desktop theme called Vaio Space, which had these windows on the sides that animated to the middle when you clicked on them. Packed with an awesome programs like “3D movie maker” that allowed you to make cartoon movies, and lets not forget about Ski Free or Rodents Revenge. 
<!--more-->
I messed around a lot with that computer, taking it apart, removing the hardware and inspecting it. Nothing too damaging, I was a kid so my curiosity didnt reach too far, I didnt know how to push the limits. Never was never good with software manipulation, ended up deleting some files under the Windows directory which wouldnt let the PC boot up. Parents had to call in a tech to boot into a floppy so he can use recovery tools to fix it, probably fdisk or something. I sat with that guy and gazed while he would type commands into the cmd. Even so, I felt more of a hardware guy, I just loved to take things apart, didnt care much to put them back together. 

Back in high school I would work for free at a local computer repair shop just to get gain experience. I have gotten so far in my career from that place and started practicing for the A+ certification. Worked on so many computers at that shop, even did some printer repair, and into surveillance extraction. One day at the shop, I had this order that was very suspicious. I was building a gaming PC from scratch and we didn’t get many gamers that came here. I also would typically see the customers and knew about orders but this one sprung out of no where. I was thinking it was a prank that someone was doing on me, but Christmas day there it was, the PC I worked on for the past few days, a present from my parents.

I must of worked there for almost 2 years before starting a my own small repair service offering free at your home repairs. Got a few jobs but never got too far. I was bad at marketing, and I still am, but thats not what made me change directions. The career changing moment happened at a relatives party, where I meet a Sony Electric engineer. He basically told me that computer repair doesn't pay the bills, and to pursue software development or electrical engineering. The sound of paycheck is what made me rethink what I want, and promises of an easier life. 

## What of it
Most professionals would say that this is not a good way to start a career, the lust of money, and I agree. That was not the only thing that was driving me in this direction, the fact that I enjoyed tech so much, and I got bored with repair, so I thought to myself that at least as a coder I would have to learn something new. In the beginning I wasn't that interested in it at all, and even years later I still can care less. It was an acceptable career path that is respected, challenging, and feels very rewarding. Yet, I haven't really been evolved in the community, ignored local meet-ups, haven't kept up with releases and updates on the platforms I worked on, and I never had enormous hatred towards it. It was an acceptable job to me.

That might sound as if I am a horrible developer that just “faked it till I made it”.  I can assure you this is not true and its the point im gonna try to get across. Even though I had no passion for this path, I still performed an outstanding job on every project I worked on. Why? because I'm a man of perfection, I have a reputation to uphold as a model human being. Its a duty that we owe to perform as best as we can when we get paid for it. Its not moral for me to do a barbaric job that will bring shame to myself. If you do not like your job, don't use it as an excuse to perform poorly, you should either find a way to make peace with what you do, or find something else. Don't have other people suffer from your incompetence, its developers like me that will have to go into some atrocious code base and fix all the crap. 

Working at a company where I feel fulfillment, encourages me to invest into myself and become a better developer. Its so that the company I work for can succeed. I know that sounds a bit optimistic, and I know I dont single handedly do this, but I am a part of it. Most people would typically learn for themselves so they would be more attractive in the job market. It doesnt matter how you do it, just make sure you are improving your skills and always moving forward. Change makes the world go round, if you dont improve for yourself do it for others. Thats where I am, I improve so that other people will be glad I am there in support.

## Things that made me want to quit
There is an overwhelming amount of tools, libraries, and language information that gets pushed on you when starting a career in development. School and home projects do not prepare you for this. My first Android project which I worked on alone, had Retrofit, Dagger, ButterKnife, and RXJava. I knew little of these libraries cause I used some in my thesis, but that knowledge was minimal, put on top of that the proper programming patterns needed. I had little time to learn these libraries with no help from anyone at work, which is a problem that some Consulting companies have, lack of support for their developers. This was overwhelming to do in the beginning although if I had a mentor in a helpful company, this could have been enjoyable.

The people, not that I am targeting anyone, or saying that all devs act this way. This is more of “mind yourself”when at work, or“think before you speak”. Dont get me wrong, im all for explicit thinkers, but there is a proper way to express yourself and a harmful way. Developers lack empathy, are arrogant, and narcissistic. Each to their own, by all means be yourself, but when you are at work, you should put team priorities first. Examples: 1) you should not refuse help when you are struggling, other devs can sense this and quality of code can be negatively impacted by implementing your hacks. Dont let pride get in your way, we all need help from time to time. 2) remember where you came from, you use to be bad at your job so be forgiven and helpful to the JRs. 3) Stop being arrogant, your way is not the only way, hear out other options and dont be over critical. 4) This might depend on your geographic location, Politics in the company. I often see promotions from friendships rather than performance. People that are Mids at best get promoted to Advance because of their soft speaking skills and by good terms with management.

## Where I am now
You reading this blog shows that something has changed, the fact that I'm trying to be involved in the community. So what happened? Well im still myself and I can care less, but since this is a profession of mine I might as well go all in and do more than my expectations. It also grew on me, I made development be fun. I don't complain that I have to refactor garbage, or implement a new design on a view for the 5th time, even though It is terribly painful and unbearable. After years of coding it's so easy that it's hard to hate, basically the easier it gets the more you can enjoy. I don't know everything there is to know or all the solutions out there for every problem. There is a lot of things that I would struggle with, but I know that I am capable of overcoming most challenges. More so with competent teams that have a various range of professional skills. Programming is a team activity and just like any sport, you can do it on your own, but how likely are you to succeed. 

I am kinda involved now, and try to make a presence in the community, not a big one but something. Its mainly cause I dont want this to take over my life, I would prefer to spend time with family. So I try to manage my spare time wisely and dedicate some time to help people in development, reading tech, polish my skills, and blogging. Some jobs can be painful to start with and then become something enjoyable in the future, and this is my example. Just be sure it's not something you absolutely hate.

## Words of wisdom
“Work smart but not hard” is such BS, you need to do both. You also can not be smart in something if you haven't worked hard to achieve the skill. Nothing comes easy, being smart is not an easy thing.

Just cause you do for money does not mean it will never grow on you. I started my career with a mindset of getting paid a well deserved salary, but I also enjoyed the high level field I was getting into. Just make sure its not something you despise and you can tolerate. 

Get the job you love and you will never work again, while this is true but lots of people do not know what they would love for work. It is also possible to have a career that you do not love, do an amazing job, and not have it painful to show up. Thats where I am.