---
layout: post
title: "Dangers of Agile"
permalink: /blog/:title
date: 2019-12-21 20:00:00 -0700
tags: [agile, development, safe, warning, scrum, waste]
categories: [development]
---
## Why you picking on my friend
There are so many different variants of agile, each with its own definition and rules to follow. In short, agile is the ability to move forward by creating and responding to change. It allows projects to have a general idea of the finalization of their product. You do not want to plan the whole project out (known as “Big Design Up Front”), so that you can leave room for changing requirements, because most likely they will change. This whole mindset is accomplished with Iterative works like planning, grooming, standups, kanban, story boards, combining coding work and testing, sprints, etc, and frameworks such as Scrum, Extreme Programming or Feature-Driven Development, etc. To keep you from thinking that I am against agile let me do some explaining. 
<!--more-->
## This is me explaining things
I don't think that agile is a bad process, it has many benefits and it is a much better than its predecessor... using the waterfall method. I am very much for Agile, and even embrace it, which is why i got SAFe certified because I very much enjoy it. It helps companies save money, time, resources, and best of all it helps get a high quality product out the door. It is up to the company to implement it correctly and “fix” places in agile that are not set to company standards or hold a product back. Main point im trying to make is that, just because its popular and has these benefits do not blindly follow it and use your head to improve Agile when you see places it lacks. Don't ignore blind spots just because agile tells you too, weigh out the alternatives and see if a better route is available for your particular problem.

With that said I bring this to you because these are thing I have noticed in agile organizations that I consider time wasters and improvement points. Not all of these are agile practices happen in every company. Your company may have been one of those to modify agile a bit, so kudos. I do notice a strong culture when a company adapts agile and treat it like a religion, bu we should all learning to improve not stay the same. What works for one company may not work for another, same for teams, so dont get hyper critical cause someone thinks outside the box, embrace and evaluate.

## Not pulling in a story
My biggest and most hateful agile practice is when you cannot start next sprints work without completing the current spring. Of course this practice does not happen with Kanban board, its more of a story board issue, or at least I hope its not happening on Kanban. When you commit to a sprint you are committing to complete all the work in that sprint, so you may not proceed if there is work still in the sprint. Makes sense and its reasonably, but lets go over some situations where this logic is destructive. 

All your work is complete but your teammates are still working. This is common but not yet a reason to pull in a story. If other devs do not need help, or it would cause more harm to help, or pair programming would be worthless, and if testers on your team are all set and do not need your help. Now its a good reason to pull in work. The least you can do is to start investigating the next sprint with what is needed to be done and how. I call this sprint creeping. I do not find it acceptable but its better than doing nothing? This is a typical scenario when reaching the last few days of a sprint. 
  
Another good example is having blocked stories which are still in the sprint because they will be unblocked “soon”, while there is no more work in the sprint. A team is working on unblocking it, but even if its %100 guaranteed to be unblocked, your still waiting around and this time can be used for something else. In these cases im always under the assumption that the story will not be unblocked any time soon, its typical for devs to under estimate when they will finish. Sometimes its a 20 minute wait, other times it's a week. Use your best judgment and check the backlog cause finding a 10 minute bug fix can be done while another team is unblocking you.

So what do you do, well you can do self learning, watch videos, social media, or just start the work without letting anyone know. All but the first are dangerous ideas, although the best solution would be just pulling in another story and not get caught up on metrics, even if you cannot complete the other story. Which brings me to my next point.

## Not pulling in a story because it wont get done within the current sprint
This is doing a disservice to your team and company, although agile practices do this because sprint goal achievements can get off sync and/or metrics, or some other stupid reason. In my opinion not doing work is worse than any other reason you can have (any reasons from agile perspective, not from architecture or management). Having the capacity, the willingness of the dev, and the blessing of the team, sounds like a good reason to start the work. 

Whats the worse that will happen on a programming perspective, or from an agile view. There are no direct affects from doing this on the product or any loss of value from the company. You already captured PI objectives and as long as the story is working towards company goals there is nothing to lose. A pulled in story that you do not complete just gets pushed to the sprint you are going into which leaves you off a little closer to completing that story on time.

This can also be very helpful in finding out the story has missing criteria, or needs a spike, hashing out details, creating enablers, having discussions. You have nothing to lose but a lot to gain. I have never had a situation where I regretted this action, and most of the time I have to do this without letting the agile team know. The only times this is a failure is, if the story ends up being thrown away cause of a change of plans. This is not that big of a deal because either, this rarely happens, you didn't backlog groom properly, or the devs would of wasted time doing nothing anyways, and this would of happened irregardless and is not connected. I only bring it up because I have heard it as an excuse.

## Conclusion on the first 2 points
I have seen and even did some light math to notice how much time is wasted throughout a 3 month PI. Teams could save almost a full sprint (it was like 4/5ths) just by removing these first 2 points. I typically see about a day wasted per bi-weekly sprints per dev on average, although I do see weeks with 2 or 3 days of sitting around. If your company does not want to change then figure out something to do the last few days of the sprint, start blogging, learn something new, don't do nothing. Just cause the PO or Scrum master have no problem wasting companies time, and the company has no problem with this wasted time, dont waste your own time. Be smarter and be progressive in your career by taking this time to progress.

To be perfectly clear on the conditions which you should use to pull in a story, so that time wouldn't be wasted are... You have no work or have blocked work, you have no possible way to help or work with anyone else on the team including testers and possibly other platform devs, and everyone on the team agrees for the work in question to be pull in. Having WIP or knowingly not being able to complete the story should not be prerequisites.

## Helping other teams by taking some of their stories
Yeah, this one sounds crazy, but cross team work within a sprint is a thing, so hear me out. This should be a last case scenario. In this instance im not talking about someone who is working cross teams, but rather someone who is dedicated to a team, has nothing to do, and sees another team struggling and falling behind on their PI goals. Sure its not this devs responsibility, and in no way should he force his help onto the team, but rather it should be seeked out. This practice in general is dangerous and I do not recommend it on a day do day basis, but if executed properly it has outstanding outcomes.

Some criteria needs to be set since so much can go wrong, and we dont want this dev having to provide maintenance on stories from another team. So first of all if and only if, that team allows a dev to work on their feature set, can we even consider this option. This means that the dev is trusted, senior, and has good communications with other teams, meaning he a team player. We don't want this dev going into another workspace and telling them how things should be done. It also helps a lot if the product both teams are working on is the same. Having a completely separate product/feature may add a lot of time for explanation to the helpful dev so they would understand whats going on. Also that dev can offer help if it doesn't affect his teams PI goals, so no taking large or complex stories that could carry on for long periods of time, but if that does happen, you need to have a hand off plan. 

That's the last idea, is having a hand off plan irregardless of the condition. The worse that should happen is that this work doesn't get merged in. So its time wasted, but that would have happened irregardless considering its the only reason help was offered. If the work doesn't get completed, the sprint is over, and there isn't much work left, you should continue working as long as there is capacity for you to do so. Otherwise hand it off with details and that team can finish where you left off, or we can hope. If your work gets merged in and bugs are discovered, that team should take care of it, unless you have capacity then you should help out. I personally would try to take the easy and quick stories if at all possible. With all of this, if the code evaluation process is good, there should be minimal problems with this approach. Main thing is to have a hand off approach prepared before starting a story and map out all the possibilities. Then evaluate who will take care of what and in which scenario.

## Point sizing not related to time
When sizing a story with your teammates, you typically give a Fibonacci number between 1-13 points. This number is based on the effort, complexity, and risk, although effort does not equal time but rather difficulty. Which are all extremely arbitrary values and that is the goal, but I see it as counter intuitive if left without a consideration of time. There will be a moment where you will get a good amount of stories that have the same points at high variability. So sometimes a 1 pointer may take 2 hours, other times it will take 6 hours, and the 3 pointer can take 3 hours. Some see this as being ok, but I see that most sprints will end up with no work to do near the end. Im not suggesting to use only time estimates, but rather include time into effort, complexity, and risk. If its a quick change type of story, but the area you have to code will require more effort and introduce risk, maybe its not an 8 but a 3. Its stories like this that points do not add up, when the evaluation conditions are against each other. 

Either way you look at it the points still show mathematically as time values, and its easy to calculate how much a point is worth in time. ((Business hours per sprint / points) / devs). Lets say its 4 hours per point cause I have been seeing this consistently throughout teams. Would it still make sense to change a string value and call it a 1 pointer, 4 hours to change a single string, fix tests if needed, push it through the pipeline, and get it tested and accepted. Do this little experiment at your job, check out how long some stories take in terms of time, and compare to how many points that story has. Are the time values close? If most of the stories are way off and you are in a developed team of 9+ months together, its time to re-evaluate the teams pointing strategy. If most story points are within a reasonably range or you are a new/developing team, I wouldn't worry as much, the rhythm seems to be going well.

I don't see this problem being a big issue in agile, as long as the team can pull in stories irregardless of my first 2 points. The estimates you would get with time will be more accurate but then there can be less wiggle room within a sprint, not necessarily an issue if you plan to %80 capacity. With or without time considerations, I tend to see that devs do this sub consciously anyways. Its natural to think in terms of time and most devs will replace effort with time. 

## Sprint objectives
This is just annoying and provides no value, gives no consequences. You basically repeat what you will be doing during the sprint in a human readable form and label these points as objectives, as if people actually read this, considering its just for the team. I can see product managers referring this, they would typically just ask for it, and the amount of time they look at this crap is so small, they are mainly big picture, whats being done in the PI. On top of that you already mapped out and noted what milestones will be accomplished each sprint in PI planning, which you do this to expose blockers for other teams. If you fail a sprint objective, "its ok but please try not to do it again".

## Non technical skills among PO and Scrum master, considered a +
Not that I think a PO needs any technical skills, but it can help get stories across easier, and devs job go a lot smoother. Devs wouldn't have to spend hours explaining why they need to refactor since a non-technical PO wouldn't understand its necessity if there is no up front product value. I would be able show code to explain things instead of creating a completely separate POC. They can build and test without you there. I don't understand why its considered a bad trait to have this skill, considering I have found relief working with technical POs. Is it really just because POs will make assumptions? Its not the fault of being technical, its learning and training experience, make the first mistake, prevent the next. Its also part of training a PO, you gotta show em the ropes before they can climb, irregardless from what background they have had.

## Demos
If you work in a big company, this is a huge waste of time especially if its not properly divided. These can drag on for 2-3 hours maybe even more, showing off stuff that you will never touch or even care about. That should be a good enough reason right there, demos that provide no value are worthless. 

Generally I am a documentation type of guy, but that shouldn't subject everyone to my way of things. The only demos of value are small team oriented demos, only the teams that the work pertains to should be involved. If im in a team that is relying on another team to get their work done so that my team can use it. Yes we want to do a demo, show how it works, and how the team can use it. If I will never use your stuff but you are working on a feature close to mine, just have a recording cause I most likely I wont care nor have question. I of course am speaking on behalf of the dev and not the PO or Stakeholders just to be clear, they should and can be involved in each of those demos. If stakeholders must see all demos, then a big demo room, where people can easily go in and out would be preferred, on a timed schedule, no late showers, no BS, no overtime.

## Not getting requirements prior
Since agile changes it requirements quickly and often, you may not get requirements till you have to start the work. This is a bit too late and I see that frontend gets whacked by the stick worse than backend, or the platform further from the source gets it worse. Most likely the stakeholders already committed to functionality they want, but sure sometimes a feature gets removed last minute. For the most part, %80 of the requirements can be documented a PI prior with little change. The goal is to be able to look over the feature and hash out any issues that devs may find and create enablers. Doing this prior to the PI that implements the work will help enormously. I often see blockers happen if you add everything last minute creating unprepared teams, broken communication, and ciaos. The benefits vastly outweigh the negatives.

I want to avoid situations for example where backend and frontend get the requirements and need to complete the feature in the same PI. They get only a high level overview during PI planning but that's not enough time to get a good understanding of the feature work and can contribute to under planning the feature. Also the parity that backend and frontend devs need to be on, couples the teams and their efforts. Backend finished a payload in sprint 3, so in sprint 4 the frontend can start implementing their portion of the work. Well frontend finds issues or bugs, now they have to wait for backend to fix it. Frontend could of started earlier with mock data only if they had the requirements. Just being able to explore the feature 2 sprints ahead would do wonders, but preferably a PI prior.

Provide requirements early enough so devs can properly create, scope and do enablers. While its late enough that major changes are unlikely to happen. Documentation a PI prior and having enablers, spikes, prototypes a PI or Sprint prior.

## Ability to change requirements
Im not against this at all and it is needed, im only against it when leaders use this as an excuse for any mistake they make. I often see requirement changes that could have been done from the start but it wasnt caught, which is ok but once it becomes consistent its no longer a good excuse. At that point its a failure on that person for consistently not seeing the whole picture, most likely their understanding was poor and instead of investigating the work they half-ass it. This excuse is overused and just a way to ignore fault and the opportunity for improvement.

A light example would be adding a backend error mapper so that frontend gets its payloads in a consistent format. The company does this everywhere just not in this feature, you mention it, but its not needed, not here not ever. Until it is needed because “requirements changed”, and out of nowhere, can you believe it we want to be consistent with other endpoints. Its examples like these where if roles were reversed the dev would end up having a “5 whys” discussion, but the leaders just use excuses.

No excuses, be professional and face your consequences, its one of the best ways to improve.
