---
layout: post
title: "Remote Misery"
permalink: /blog/:title
date: 2020-02-02 20:00:00 -0700
categories: [development, rant]
---
## Hooray remote
Working remote is the hottest thing since the invention of fire, tons of companies allow this and for good reason. The fact that the company does not need office expenses would be one of the best reasons of going remote. Rent prices are shooting up every year, especially in Silicon valley and basically most of California. There also is a huge shortage of competent developers through out the world, making it difficult to get new hires especially in niche platforms like pure native Android and iOS. Expanding your search radius to other countries and giving a remote opportunity can save you on costs of developer and get that talent you desperately need. There are much more benefits to remote but I am here to “warn” or "inform" some of the dangers and possible solutions to the worst problems that will occur with full remote. In short you may want to hold on to that office space.
<!--more-->

## Distractions
By far the worst remote problem for developers to overcome are the home distraction. Whether it is the kids, pets, people living in the same place, if you do not have a dedicated home office, or you work in an open space, it is very easy to get distracted. Its enough that you already got devs, PO’s, and meetings taking up your time, which causes you to loss focus on your work. Adding other home factors will result less work to get done within your normal hours of operation, or it will force working overtime. Best solution when trying to manage time, is to have a dedicated office room that is isolated from the rest of the house. Sound proof, and a steel door is a plus but for real, who's gonna do that. Make sure people will not distract you during a set of dedicated hours and have it be known to everyone in the household that its work time. No matter what the issue is, fire, robbery, friends taking shots of vodka, be reasonable and analyze the situation, it shouldn't be consistent. They must treat this time as if you are not even home, so lock the door, put a sign up, force payment for entry, setup a trap, be creative in how you manage people from distracting you. Another solution would be to go to an work space like WeWork, or a local lounge, but $$ and procrastination happens there.

## Procrastinate
If your anything like me, I procrastinate a lot, from having to make coffee and cleaning the kitchen in the process, to looking inside the fridge multiple times, hoping to find new items to eat every time I open it. This happens at the office too, from taking a walk around the campus, forcing random co-workers into conversation, and internet browsing. I sometimes go into the break room just to fill up the coffee machine, it gets to a point were its already full, but I get a little more in there. I just find procrastination easier to do at home, since there are more things to interact with, and your in the comfort of your comfy pjs, or commando. This is a personal problem and there is no good solution, you need to hype yourself up with what needs to be done, gamify it. I tend to try and batch things with the “Pomodoro Technique”. For example I do about 10-15 minutes of procrastination then an 1-2 hours of work. These times vary depending on what the task and how deep into the programming zone I can get. Irregardless I try to get at least a few minutes break every hour so my eyes can adjust and I can stretch out the legs.

## Harder Discussions
Engineers like to get into arguments, they are arrogant and biased to their own views, stubborn like an antivaxer with no way to convince them otherwise. This becomes more true and harder to control the more senior the devs are. This is all normal and fine, but when every dev is remote it is harder to have these discussions and get points across. Also getting third parties opinions, or having group platform chats are harder to coordinate especially when some of these devs are in different time zones. This may cause delays in work progress as in a blocked PR, and to get the right people to sync up may take a day or more. When in an office, there is a set office hours of operations, so setting up a meeting or walking over to the person in question is quick and easy. There is not much you can do to streamline this, I would just prepare all my facts and have it in a presentable form, with sources so when you sync up it would be an organized discussion. Also have a set path forward in certain types of situations. Like a blocked PR, if its not a big show stopper, or the recommended fix is easy to implement later, you should merge now and fix after the discussion, if the result will be to fix.

## Coordination
This is the worse remote problem for the company to solve. It is improper to think that being a code monkey is a good thing, you will not produce quality if you do not have a great understanding of what you are building. The domain of the service needs to be known by every dev at least on a basic level. The bounded context that the dev is working on needs to be known perfectly. How can you produce good code if you don’t know the big picture. Grooming, planning, and syncing with teams, are all things that will be very difficult to do. It is easier to solve this problem when its between office to office, but when each dev is as a separate home office, the complexity spikes. I find it difficult to have quality conversation when there are 6 or more people at a time, each speaking over the other. If these agile technique are skipped or poorly done it will be harmful. It is very easy and tempting to get through planning and grooming quickly, much so over a call. Devs cant keep focus that long with out being distracted.

## Meet and greet
This one is just for big companies, since in small startups or newly forming companies it will be difficult not to meet everyone you work with. The one and only reason I enjoy planning PI’s is because I meet a lot of people I do not work with directly. Its a good time to talk with other people about just personal interests and learning about the company with what the other roles and responsibilities are. Knowing how one persons work effects yours, and getting more communication paths within the organization will help you advance or at least learn. This does not happen as easily or maybe even at all when working remote. You may not have a direct path to architecture or to IRT management, and knowing these things exist with the possibility of direct communication is a thing you want to have. You also should want random people in the company to know what you do and why they would want to reach out to you with particular problems.

## Loneliness
The loneliness and boredom is strong with remote work. The conversations you have, you don’t want, the conversation you want, you don’t have. This might not be a big issue for our generation considering that a lot of people nowadays do not partake in passive communication. About 90% of people I attempt to communicate with make It very difficult by not contributing any useful information. People are just shy, but this does not mean that they wont be affected by loneliness. Its not just the conversation piece that avoids being lonely but also knowing that people are around, and seeing living things is much better than nothing. Just like your cat or dog, you don't need to talk to them, but when you get home, after they were alone for a long time, having your presents means a lot to them. Working and living in isolation just feels very painful to me. The way I avoid this is with taking a nice break during lunch to go for a walk with the dog, get some food, talk with the cashier or some random person. Its just that initial walk that does a lot and keeps me sane. 