---
layout: post
title: "The Google Interview"
permalink: /blog/:title
date: 2020-01-25 20:00:00 -0700
categories: [development]
---
## Google-vision
Google such a magnificent company, but they had a rough start, trying to sell themselves to Yahoo for 1 million in 1998. Yahoo refused and realized their mistake 4 years later were they offered 3 billion for Google, which they responded that they want 5 billion, and of course Yahoo refused, they are know for real bad business decisions. Since 2002 Google has gone a long way, they have integrated into our lives, and are a part of us now, being valued at over 700 billion in 2020. In a way its kinda sad how much we depend on Google, even Apple users are hooked to some of Googles services, Google is in everything of web. They are like a secret spy agency, and not that they care about you as an individual but rather as a group. Google has the big data from predicting political advantages with what helps and what’s harmful, to knowing how specific groups act and their shopping tendencies. This is good and bad, but for this post I am not here to talk about “the evils of Google” since its a lot of propaganda, and its the trade-off of doing business with them. Irregardless the fact is that every company has the right to do what they want within the laws of the country. We all acknowledge and allow Google to take over some of our life aspects, sacrificing your individualism for convenience.
<!--more-->

So why did I apply to Google knowing they do things that are against my ethical values, sounds like I’m a sell out. Well, I am against a lot of the stuff Google does and what it has become, which is why I limit on a lot of the services I use from them, but they create tons of useful tools that help people, they save time and money. They are a company that has some bad within a lot of good. I don’t see them as actively and purposely being malicious like Apple or being governed by total corporate greed. Every company is greedy but some are more greedy than others and create unrepairable machines on purpose so that you would need to buy a new one, or forced to replace whole modules of a computer instead of components. The main reason I would want to work for Google is for the knowledge I can gain. They are after all, an advanced tech company with well defined and tuned, strategies, tactics, libraries, work flows. I wanted to know how to do tech the right way and after college this would be the easiest job to start with, since they love college recruits. With this, I do understand that Google would not be a life long career but rather a 2-3 year job, just gain very professional experience and then, I can go to a company which would better fit me. So I guess in a way, im a sell out, although I never worked there.

## Out of date
One of the things that really blew my mind was that Google does not use tools after they have acknowledged support for them. What I mean by this, a few months after the adoption of Kotlin in Google, I asked the recruiter if I can do the coding challenge in Kotlin. He replied with something along the lines of “even though Google supports Kotlin, no teams are required to use Kotlin nor are the coding challenges able to be performed in Kotlin”. Im guessing by now, it has changed or I hope it has, but the main point is that after Google announced their support, there was no plan of having Kotlin take over or even have it used. I understand it takes time, but this wasn’t sudden decision, and it happens often with most companies, the integration takes a long time. Do you prioritize security updates the same way, library bug fix updates, is this why when an Android bug is filed and recognized by Google it takes months or years for them to fix. I guess I was just hoping of a quicker adoption of the language from the company that’s driving it to be used for third party developers. I never used Kotlin till I heard about Google’s support, after that it took me a month to learn it and present to the company why we should use it over Java. 

This one scenario is not an issue, it just makes me think, since they lack the driving force for Kotlin to be used in the company, what other things are overlooked, and maybe they are not as professional as I imagine. Lets not forget that the decision was probably partly done in response to the fact that Sun was suing Google for using Java.

## Back to school
Im not a big fan of the coding challenges that Google has, its actually not just Google but also other tech companies. The mindset of thinking that intense algorithms and data structure testing is the one and only test to get “out of the box” thinkers is not true. This eliminates unique candidates and makes them all the same, algorithmic thinkers, almost “problem solvers”. I dont mind this testing strategy but it shouldn't be the one and only focus when hiring a candidate. I understand the concept and why they thing its the best and only way to test knowledge, but in the end its just like another college test. It requires a bunch of studying and solving a bunch of examples, after enough time and problems, you see the patterns and you can basically envision solutions before writing anything down. With doing enough of them you can fake it into a company without having any knowledge about the platform you applied for. No technical or programming skills needed. 
In my years of a engineer, I have never had to create a big data algorithm, nor do most places care if I do. Throughout my career I use algorithms and data structures, but its no where near the level of these coding challenges. These companies should test for the knowledge needed in the field you are expected to work in. Its like applying for a cashier and expected to do payroll balances cause you work with money so why not. There is no problem with adding in an algorithmic problem to the coding challenge so they can evaluate your critical thinking, but it doesn't need to be algorithm centric. These companies likely did some research and noticed a smaller turn around by having all big data coding challenges, but what if they just haven't found the right combination and decided that its just this that works. 
It would be pretty hard for a senor that has worked in a field for 20 years, but has limited knowledge in algorithms to get hired at these companies. Even though they are innovative, smart, with high potential and improvement ideas. How can you ignore these areas when wanting a new hire, why would you want to miss these areas. In essence the coding challenge should be combined with other aspects of coding, it should involve framework, tools, libraries, algorithms and data structures, patterns, coding standards and naming conventions, and even a bit of testing. This doesn't have to be a 10 hour test and the amount required would depend on the seniority of the candidate. What if an Android candidate for example, would have a github repo with a template of a project for the coding challenge and asked to add, modify, and create these aspects while an actual problem is embedded in there to solve. Depending on seniority of the dev it will expand or shrink the needed knowledge by its width and height, so you might remove testing for a JR or add more testing for a SR over Mid.

## Preparation
So I have went through the coding challenge at Google twice, as in 2 separate interviews, and it shouldn't come as a shock but I overly prepared myself the first time. The second time, I didn’t care enough to really study and I did less than bare minimum to be prepared, I also have done a lot from the first time that stuck with me. Initially you might assume that the second time could have been worse since I have not prepared as much. On the other hand it could have been better since I had more experience in programming. Well it went better because of whom was interviewing me, if I would of had similar interviewers I would of done much better my first time.

For my first coding challenge preparation, it was at the time when I have finished my studies and was getting ready to move to USA from Poland. I still had lots of fresh material and memories from my Algorithm classes, I had 2 classes based on this topic. I wasn’t the best but I had a good understanding and even created some complex programs based on neural network, nearest neighbor, grouping based on observational data and more. Once I heard that Google will be interviewing me, I also started to do a lot, like tons of leetcode algorithm practices. I was pulling off the medium tasks without cheating. Sure they were not easy and took me some time to do, but I was on that level of competence. I also watched videos Google released on youtube on what to expect, how to act, and what I should be doing during the challenge. With the official Google videos, I watched other youtubers that went through the challenge to see if they will give some helpful tips. I must of spent around 50 hours preparing myself, which initially doesn't mean much if you haven't learned what to do properly, but I think I achieved it. 

For my second coding challenge preparation, I must of done about 2 hours of leetcode and that's it. I wanted to get in but didn’t care enough because I already had a challenging job, and was learning on a daily bases with lots of fun challenges. Only reason I went for it is because a Google recruiter reached out to me, and made it sound like they wanted to hire because they saw the work I have been involved in. This was not the case, it was just another recruitment spammer, so while I was on the phone interview with the recruiter I didn’t want to just back off, so I went with it.

## Second Challenge Approved
First im going to explain the second coding challenge, since it was a pleasant experience. The fact that I was completely under prepared, I still went through with it, I had no expectations and no hope. As far as they told me, it wasn’t that bad. I completed the challenge and was on my way to bring the time complexity down, I had some trouble memorizing how to access arrays and even creating them, I mean, I have been using Kotlin for so long, I fully forgot how to do some of these simple operations in Java, and without any references I was kinda screwed. Although overall, the interviewer was kind, responded to my questions, and even helped out when I forgot some Java syntax. So it was a pleasant experience, even though I didn’t pass, but being told that “you were close” made me feel good that I still know a bit about algorithms. I didn’t feel stuck on the problem, and I feel like a big set back was not knowing the Java syntax. I did finish bringing the time complexity down, but it was partially in pseudo code. I was just disappointed that this was not my first experience when I had actually studied and cared about getting in.

## First Challenge Accepted
The first coding challenge at Google is were everything was bad, and it was such a big hit to my moral. I started to contemplate if I was that dumb or if something was wrong during the coding challenge. I was in Poland doing this interview, and even though I was trying to get into Boulder CO they still had someone closer to my timezone to host the challenge. It was another Pollack, which I thought at the time that its cool, all Pollacks stick together. He got on the call a bit over 10 minutes late, which at this point its whatever to me, I got nothing better to do, and people do get caught up in things, no big deal. When he got on the call, we talked a bit in polish, I was curious about working at Google. How is it working there, what they do for fun, how they operate, and asking about the country where he is working from, he was working outside of Poland. 

First thing that started to worry me from this conversation is that this guy that’s doing the coding challenge with me is currently an Intern at Google and has only been working there a few months. During the conversation I was caught up in the moment, I didn’t care that much, and also what can I do. Then the mood completely changed, he let me know that we should start with the challenge because the conversation is eating up time and since he was late we no longer have 45 minutes but 25 minutes. OH Great… So his tardiness is my problem, and talking with him takes up time. 

╭∩╮(-_-)

I was well prepared back then so I thought to myself, challenge accepted, I still got 25 minutes no problem. The cherry on top of this is that he said we need to talk in English for the interview, and when he started to speak in a broken, incomplete, grammar prone, English accent, I knew I was screwed. I caught about 1/4 of the words he said, and he would not speak Polish even after me explaining that I have no idea what he is saying. The challenge wasn’t even written down for me to read, he copied and pasted 2 arrays, one with numbers, another with animal names, and started to explain the problem. Something about “if and an of x has letter of y take that and multiple the letters with some number from the array of another array with adding 2 more things into the first”. I have no idea what he said. I tried to understand by translate what I thought he wanted from me, seemed like nothing that I interpreted was right. So after another 10ish minutes, I decided to just start programming and I told him that I do not understand what he wants, but I will start making a method with variables and see if im doing it right. 

Next problem, these were not arrays but rather csv files. I don’t know about you but I haven't had much experience in this right after college, with little career experience, mostly just Android knowledge. Don’t mistake this thinking I did not know what to do, I knew what and how, but I haven't done this enough and wasn’t prepared for this type of challenge. I did have pretty extensive Java skills but up to this date I have never had to create a BufferedReader or a FileReader or a Scanner in a real life application. Im sure there are times to do this, but who memorizes this stuff when you don’t do this regularly. So im sure my syntax was wrong but I knew I needed a BufferedReader, read the lines in a for loop, and separate by using a comma delimiter. It wasn’t %100 correct but in my defense it was a stupid request. 

In the end what I ended up doing was, (which I think it was the task), created a currency converter. So the array of animals was the name of the currency, the other array was the value, they mapped to each other one to one, and I made an example of converting one currency to another with a third one as reference. It might of been all wrong, but I completed the basics of the task, if that's what he was asking for. As you can imagine, I didn’t get the job, and after that, I don’t know if I would want to work at Google. If they have these slip ups, im sure it happens in their process all the time. I want a professional work environment, one that fixes their mistakes, and admits fault. I wasn’t able to get a redo, or get a second opinion, or get reevaluated because of the complains I submitted. They didn’t consider me at all because of a lazy employee, which clearly didn’t want to do interviews nor was he qualified. 

Even the best companies have stains that never get cleaned.