---
layout: post
title: "Different types of developers"
permalink: /blog/:title
date: 2020-01-04 20:00:00 -0700
categories: [development]
---
## Types of what now? 
No matter what your career is, there will be typical behavioral patterns that you recognize within your co-workers. A lot of these patterns are universal between any career, and surely some are stereotypical within a field of work. In general this is good and healthy, we want people to be different, its the change in our lives that make us think and adapt. Although with these differences there will also be conflict, which may lead to hardcore office battles of the wits. When working in a professional environment and you want to be taken seriously, there are patterns and tactics that you can use to ensure a civil dispute. The same can be said that there are proper ways and actions to handle these different types of people.
<!--more-->
This is a guide that lists the types of developers I have meet across my career which I tend to see as repetitive at many companies, so I have captured them. This is not a guide to help you change out of one of these habits or to help you speak with difficult people. Those are skills and powers you can do on your own, knowledge is the biggest battle and the hardest to overcome. Not many people want to admit to, or even be aware of a bad habit they may possess. Most of these people do not even try to search for any of their own flaws. I do, and I hope you try as well, not all flaws need repair, there are some that shouldn't bother us.

Having this awareness could be beneficial to improve your own attitude or to be prepared by knowing how to interact with different types of developers. As you will see, some of these qualities are not beneficial to obtaining a professional career, but they open the door for improvement or a challenge.

## Noob - Primary
Basically just got here, its this persons first day, and you expect so much out of them. They will slow down production, introduce bugs and rework. This is fine and normal, all companies should hire noobs, its the only way they can learn.

## Okayest - Primary
This person is ok. Their performance, ethics, passion, knowledge, speed, its all just ok. This is your typical mid, good to have, potential is sprouting, and expertise is visible.

## Master - Primary
True and purely good intentions, great at their job, and are typically good in one field. This person may be good at their job, but they have no further ambitions or goals. Its fine and dandy to come in and do your work then leave. I personally would want to see more motivation from my devs, and I encourage improvement behaviors for those that do not want to leave the scope of their work. There is nothing wrong with this type of developer, and they are great assets in the work place, but these are indications of a lack of motivation. Having a specialist in one area is a good thing in the sense that they put all their focus on that single platform, they know more than devs which expand their knowledge to various platforms. Their speciality comes in handy in making sure that the platform is on par with high expectations on coding standards and proper use of tools.

## Copy pasta
You would think this is just a JR level flaw, they are new, just learning a lot of things, getting use to this ecosystem. Very valid for a JR to do this, but still discouraged since its not a good way to learn. This would be a great place to introduce some pair programming if a SR realizes this or the JR has courage to ask for help. With that, be aware that this is not just a JR thing, I see this with SRs all the time when implementing design patterns they are not familiar with. Now this ends up being an ignorance issue and its very bad that a high level dev does not know how to implement a particular company standard pattern. This happens when the team or platform agrees to use a certain design pattern and some devs do not agree. So they do not take the time to learn it because they wont be modifying it. They will simply just use the existing ideas, maybe even correctly. To be a good developer you need to know how the code works, and how to modify it within the systems constraints, so take the time to learn important company decision like design patterns.

## Sheep
These devs do not think for themself and trust all information told to them. Not in the sense that you need to double check everything someone else does, a company needs to trust and delegate work. This is visible when there is a conflict fight within a company where you have to choice a side. The sheep will just listen with no input, no opinion of their own, and may or may not choice a side blindly. Its relatable to how people listen to the news. They believe every word without doing research on the topic or hearing out oppositions. Its because their favorite news caster told them the version of the story they wanted to hear and typically without proper context. You need to form an opinion on topics at work, if not on the spot, ask to have some time to do your own research without internal influences that may have hidden agendas. This may not be needed for every topic because some are simple enough to form a side with just listening to both sides, but when in doubt Google and shout.

## Downer
“Everything is f#cked, this company does everything wrong, why is everyone so stupid and I am the smartest.” Keep in mind that this is not your company, you do not choice what and how everything should be done. There is more than 1 correct solution, everyone has their own way that thing it is the best way. For the times that you are “correct”, follow your companies procedure, do presentations, but never slow down the business with bickering or constant arguments. If the company does not want to adapt whatever you are pushing for, then oh-well, find another job or live with it. Constant complaining is super annoying, you are not the only dev at the company, and you might not be the only person that feels this way, so do as much as you can without affecting work flow and then leave it alone. You are the child that throws temper tantrums so your mother will buy you that toy.

## Know it all
Acts like they know everything there is to know without providing concrete proof or reasoning. Reaches topics that they are not specialized in, and tells the proper way of executing those topics. I feel like we all do this or have done this on some level. It steams from having the base knowledge about topics but not the full understanding because you have unknowingly missed some minor details. Or sometimes you think you know the answer but you not 100% sure so instead of doing the research you go with your gut. These are minor offenses. The worse “know it all’s” are the ones when someone does this consistently and believes they are correct even when proven wrong, in any and every range of topics. They are a Wikipedia without fact checks.

## True Guru
This is the go to person in the company, when something is wrong, something breaks, knowledge insights, this person is summoned. They truly know everything or know how to get the answer and it is wise to get their input. Guru’s are a rare species, but don’t be fooled they do exists. Do not get confused or tricked by a “know it all” and think they are a “true guru” since they do try to take this form. The only issue with having a True Guru is that everyone wants a piece and it leaves teams dependent on this persons input, while taking up all of this persons time. Sure they might have the best answer but a team should make decisions on their own, its the best way to grow. This person is a true asset just be careful not to become dependent on them.

## NitPicker
This is not towards the nits of having extra white space, extra line, single vs double quote, or no semicolon which are important for consistency and readability but are easily fixed with a linter or styles checker. Im troubled by the devs that add personal interest comments because they prefer it another way. These comments do not help with readability, or improve quality, its just a personal judgement that they feel its extremely important with no backing support. Stuff like class or variable wording, not naming but wording. I have seen a 30 class PR change just because they didn’t like “employeeName” and preferred “nameOfEmployee”. Is it better, maybe or maybe not, but for me its not worth it. Or having a different way to create a loop without a good reason, like if you used forEach but they want a for loop because you have more control. I'm sure you can think of many examples, probably better than mine. NIT = Not Important Though - so if its not important to do then don’t comment it. The worse cases are when they don't understand that they are nitpicking, and they don’t accept your reasoning or explanation.

## Not a team player
They do not help the team move forward. IRT happens, some dev needs help, overtime, collective collaboration to finish feature on time, or team decided to use some new development process. This person will not help, does not care, and does not listen. Does he have better ideas? Or a better plan? No, he just chooses to do the bare minimum to stay employed. The outcast so to say

## The Helper
Always watching over your shoulder and eager to help, while this is not very harmful to do with good proportion and having a good reason. It does leads to micromanagement and an inability to trust your team to do a good job on their own. It also takes out time that could have been better spent doing another story and get work done quicker. Im glad for having people be this enthusiastic to help the team, but I prefer the help when needed and not for self encouragement. There shouldn't be a dedicated team helper, each person should be willing to offer help, but not force help.

## Lone Wolf
Good at their job but doesn't want too much contact with others. Communication is an important part of the company, even though you may not need help, nor want to offer help, its needed to be involved. This person might be involved during planning or grooming, but at their desk, they are ghosts to everyone else. May not answer back to messages or if they do its more of a hint to a solution instead of an answer. They do not help with understanding critical parts of the service they work on, simply reply with classes needed to understand but no walk through. Just gets into the programming zone.

## Slacker
Not much work gets done but acts very busy all the time as if there is too much work, or spends time refactoring things that don’t need refactoring in a story that have nothing to do with refactoring. Basically they try to give off the illusion of hard work so they can have more free time to do what they want. In a way, this is just a time thief. Sure we all do this to some degree, because 8 hours of coding gets to your brain and you cannot keep that up everyday. Im not talking about the guy who codes for an hour then takes a break, or the guy that does Pomodoro Technique. These intermittent breaks are perfectly fine, healthy and very much recommended. Im talking about the guy that finished his story hours, or even a day ago but acts as if he is still working on it while playing fortnite at home, or watching youtube when at work. Devs see this, but management may not, its hard to prove but you know.

## Characteristic of talking
Maybe its just me or a region thing, but I have noticed that most devs do not like to talk much, or open up at all. Im working with you, I want to know you a little bit, especially when you sit next to me, or on the same team. Call it bonding or a sanity check, but I don’t expect a friendship. I cant just sit and work hours on end with no communication, its the main reason why I prefer office work over remote. I strongly believe that work place bonds are important, people are more likely to help each other if they know each other. I dislike working in solitude, I enjoy human interaction.