---
layout: post
title: "Booting Recruiters"
permalink: /blog/:title
date: 2020-01-11 20:00:00 -0700
categories: [development]
---
## All your recruits are belong to us
The big rush of recruiters is among us, daily messages and friend requests from our best buds on the internet. They seem so friendly, so inviting, it's like seeing your BFF from middle school for the first time since. But beware because once they get their claws in you, they transform to that one night stand you traded for your soul. So what is happening, why are there so many, why can't they just leave me alone, What have I done to deserve this? Fear not because you are not the only one being bombarded by them, and its not just recruiters that are this atrocious, believe when I say devs are just as bad.
<!--more-->

## How they operate
The basic premise of what they do is good, on paper, just like lawyers. They find candidates for companies that are in need of a good employee. It almost sounds like an honoring job, like they are doing a generous service to the community. Which it would be if you contacted a good recruitment firm. Too many of these recruiters are like those cheesy quick cash lawyer commercials you hear on the radio. They don't care about you they just want their cash and dip out. Like a Hawk, they come out to prey on the naive through sites like LinkedIn and with keyword searches, looking for... Well anyone. Yes they literally pick random people and setup interviews without knowing the qualifications of that candidate. They basically read the back cover of a book, without reading the book itself, they try to sell it.

## Bad naughty recruiters
Not all, but a good amount, are bad at their job. Im basing this off of the experiences I have had and I have heard. When they directly contact you about a specific job, if you say you are not interested or sometimes even if you do not respond, they will put you in the database as their client so if you do end up going to the company they were going to propose, they get the referral. I am unsure on how frequently it happens but it happened to me, and ive watched it more than once. 

They get paid a lot for their hard work, and yet they do a sloppy job. It's much quicker and easier to have a huge bandwidth of potential hires thrown at a company than to find a good fitting candidate. Its a tactic that worked for the Soviets during WW2, just throw a bunch of unprepared people into a war and you will move forward. This is deceitful and misleading to the candidate and to the employer, the recruiter thing not the WW2 thing. Solely searching for keywords on LinkedIn is not a good way to get quality candidates, that's just the beginning. It takes time, patience, and dedication to get to know who this candidate is and if they are a possible fit. 

I consistently get messages for positions I do not work in, have not worked in for years, do not have any matches in my profile, require relocation, do not meet requirements of application, worked at the same company before, or requires some ridiculous prerequisites probably cause the company is sick of under performant recruits from the recruiter. The best part is that if you are not interested maybe you can recommend a unsuspecting friend to their pyramid scheme for a very low monetary bonus. Yea im procrastinating a bit, or am I?

## Giving more than %10
Its hard to believe but there are some recruiters that reach out to you which actually care about their reputation. Most of these recruiters are from firms which you have to initialize the connection, but there are some that contact exceptional professionals. You know they care if they require a placement test before they would match you with an important high paying company, making sure that you are not blowing smoke and your skills are on par. Who would of thought to test a developers skills before recommending them to a company for hire. Especially that their CV says they are professional in certain fields, you know you cant fake that, and you can trust me on that, because according to my CV im a "Doctor Engineering Architect for NewAge Development Business System Cycles in the Advancements of IoT Robots from Wales", which totally makes sense. 

You may think that the hiring company should do testing on their own, which is true, although some don’t and they go on what the recruiter says. Its also a waste of time to have a test with every possible candidate, which is the main reason that you pay recruiters so much so that the company wont have to take the time to do this. In the end the company should perform their own test, but the amount of applicants will be much lower after the recruiter filters them. 

Recruiters evaluate the candidate for other reason such as if another job that would better suite them shows up it would be easy to direct them. Like specific categories, "I want to work with Crypto but I dont mind Iot, well there is an IoT job, if Crypto comes up in the future we will let you know. Also free to take the IoT for now". The ones that care take the time to pair you with a compatible match, like a match making site. They take the time to know you, figure out what you want, and reason with you by going over your options.

## Try to evade 
I have been trying to get myself off of their radar, mainly because I am not looking for another job, which I state that pretty clear in my profile, and if I were, I would reach out to one of recruiters, or contact a company directly, if i would find one that meets my needs, just takes time. Knowing some recruiters is beneficial and recommended even if you do not plan to use them. Although at a certain point I just gotta end it. It is extremely annoying getting all these messages from recruiters so I have taken some precautions in trying to minimize the amount of spam I get. This isnt just third party recruiters, I also get a lot of spamming messages from some high end companies, they seem inviting but are just trying to make their quota, kinda like how the Police give out a bunch of speeding tickets near the end of the month.

I no longer maintain a professional profile, I still have a profile but it is totally revamped and not appealing. In a way it still is appealing, I have no idea how im still getting messages. Be informed that this is harmful to do, because companies which I would want to see my skills will not click on my profile, and companies I apply to may be discouraged by it. It gives me my peace, but at a price. I started to add stupid witty quotes to my intro, changed my profile picture to be more of an entertaining one (if that). I just keep a persistent log of my career with some pity descriptions. That's all I use my "professional" profile for, to keep dates, projects, companies, and career logs. If I want to land a new job its my resume which is made to impress, not my online profile. If a company does not tolerate my dry jokes, its probably not a good fit for me anyways.

## Grinding my gears
The biggest reason why I really hate social media recruiters is that they are all greed, you are just a number to them. When you are not interested and kindly replay as so, they do not even take the time to respond. Irregardless that they do not even try to establish a communication pipeline with you, they are direct to the point and then cut you off. I value myself more than that, I figure that they are lucky to find me, not the other way around. Its not only recruiters that do not communicate with you, its also other developers. When someone adds me, they fail to write something that's not computer generated, but when I try to engage them with conversation, they don’t reply with anything. Whats the point if you do not communicate with your peers, I assume you add for a reason, right?

## How are devs the same
This goes for every job, anywhere you go you will always find a subset of the people that are just awful at their job. Development is in dire need of more developers, so its typical that you see brain dead people, because there are not enough Seniors to meet demand and teach the new. This is easily seen at companies that don’t have high standards to get in. I see some companies breaking their own hiring process and laxing the restrictions because they need more dev power. This will end poorly, just like the $9/hr engineers at Boeing, cant polish a turd, but you can decorate it. Development is a hard career, its even harder when you do not have Senior direction, and even likely impossible to figure out the proper ways to do x, y, or z, in other words its community oriented. The “shit for brains” are out there, whether its a recruiter or a developer, the career path doesn't matter. If you don’t apply yourself to be good at your job, your not any much better than these dip shits on Linkedin.

## P.S.
I did get one of my jobs from a recruiter, even though I am hating I am not hateful against all recruiters. If you do your job well, you shouldn't be offended by what I wrote out. There are lots of really good recruiters on these social media sites, and I have quite a few in my list that I am proud to have. They never bother me and they continuously post job openings, the skills needed, salaries, and benefits. I really do enjoy reading these feeds, it keeps me informed about what other companies do to be competitive and gives me an idea of what I will want to look for if I start my hunt.